# Orion-LD v1.0.0

This document describes in detail what version 1.0.0 of Orion-LD implements of the NGSI-LD API specification, v1.5.1, released in November 2021.
The origins of Orion-LD is explained as well, particularly how Orion-LD relates to [Orion](https://github.com/telefonicaid/fiware-orion).
To top it off, future implementation plans are uncovered, making this document the number one document on the Orion-LD context broker (together with the [ETSI NGSI-LD v1.5.1 API spec](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/CIM/001_099/009/01.05.01_60/gs_CIM009v010501p.pdf), of course :)).

To fully understand this document, a reader is assumed to have a working knowledge of NGSI-LD, ideally having read the ETSI NGSI-LD API specification.


## Table of Content
1. Origins of Orion-LD and its relation to Orion
2. Installation and Deployment
3. Support of OMA NGSI and NGSIv2 requests
4. NGSI-LD Features
5. NGSI-LD Requests
6. Performance Measurements
7. Future


## 1. Origins of Orion-LD and its relation to Orion
The implementation of Orion, the OMA NGSI context broker of the FIWARE European project was initiated by Telefonica I+D back in July 2012.
The first year or so, it was just me (Ken Zangelin, now at the FIWARE Foundation) on the project, but then Fermin Galan joined me.
Fermin is now working for Telefonica Spain and he's in charge of Orion.

Orion implements the OMA NGSI APIs NGSI9 and NGSI10, and the newer NGSIv2 that was designed by Telefonica I+D.

The work on Orion-LD started in September 2018, by the FIWARE Foundation and as we wanted a broker able to handle both "the old and the new",
so a fork of Orion was created and that's where the work on adding NGSI-LD to Orion started.

The Orion-LD repository is still a fork of the Orion repository and the idea is to some day merge with Orion.
That though is a huge job and we don't have an ETA for this.

To accomplish interworking NGSI-LD/NGSI, Orion's database model is used for NGSi-LD elements.
Orion's database model was created for OMA NGSI, and when NGSIv2 was implemented, for the same backwards compatibility reason, the database model was not modified.
It makes a lot of sense, from a backwards compaibility point of view, but ...
the database model differs horrendously from the API data model, and this makes the broker a lot harder to implement and quite a bit slower as well,
as the incoming NGSi-LD payloads must be converted to the OMA NGSI model before pushed to the database.


## 2. Installation and Deployment
### Docker
To deploy Orion-LD 1.0.0 as a docker image ... (Stefan!)

### From Source Code
For you brave that prefer to build your own Orion-LD from source code, please follow the installation guide for your preferred distro:
  * [Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS](installation-guide-ubuntu-18.04.3.md)
  * [Ubuntu 20.04.1 LTS](installation-guide-ubuntu-20.04.1.md)
  * [CentOS 7](installation-guide-centos7.md)
  * [Debian 9](installation-guide-debian9.md)
  * [Debian 10](installation-guide-debian10.md)


## 3. Support of OMA NGSI and NGSIv2 requests
Since the day Orion repo was forked (September 2018), there have been no merges Orion -> Orion-LD, so, the OMA NGSI/NGSIv2 part of Orion-LD is only capable of
doing exactly what Orion was capable of back in September 2018.
A lot has happened for NGSIv2 in the Orion repo since September 2018, thus, using Orion-LD for NGSIv2 is strongly discouraged.


## 4. NGSI-LD Features
This chapter describes all the features of NGSI-LD and what is implemented or not.
Instead of treating each and every NNGSI-LD request separately, they are seen as a whole, as concepts.

Two important concepts that are not yet implemented in Orion-LD are:
* DatasetID
* Forwarding

**Forwarding** hasn't even been defined in the spec, we're still discussing it in ETSI ISG CIM.
Can't really be implemented until the API is defined.

**DatasetID** is a concept that existed in OMA NGSI, as "MetadataID".
We implemented that for Orion, NGSIv1, as it was part of the OMA NGSI specification.
Nobody ever used the feature, afaik, and it is *quite* complex.
When Telefonica I+D defined NGSIv2, to replace OMA NGSI, the whole concept was left out.
For Orion-LD, implementing NGSI-LD, where the datasetId is back ... well, let's just say it's not a top priority.
It will be implemented, we're just not putting it very high on the backlog of Orion-LD.

Anyway, a Proof-Of-Concept has been implemented for both forwarding and DatasetID.
In general, these two concepts aren't supported by Orion-LD as of right now (v1.0).
The details of the PoC's can be found b elow.

### Entities/Attributes: Creation, Modification, Deletion, Retrieval, and Query
All requests regarding Entities/Attributes are fully implemented (remember, except for DatasetID and Forwarding).
Entity creation/updates/deletions are correctly stored in both the "current state" and the "temporal evolution DB",
the appropriate notifications are sent, etc.

### Entities Query Language
NGSI-LD's new and improved Query language is implemented to about 99%.
One simplification has been made:
  AND and OR aren't allowed to mix in the same level - parenthesis needed

Example:
  a) q=A==12&B==10|C==8     is NOT ALLOWED
  b) q=(A==12&B==10)|C==8   is ALLOWED

It's a minor limitation, you can still do ALL OF IT, you just need to add some parenthesis.
It actually has a quite nice advantage as well - no confusion about operator precedence.
Just look at the two examples above. Had expression "a" been allowed, would it be identical to expression "b" ?

### Batch Operations
All "BATCH" operations (/entityOperations/*) are fully implemented.
As always, with the exception of datasetId and forwarding.

### Batch Operations and more than one instance of one and the same entity
Batch operations carry an array of entities in its payload.
If the very same entity is present more than once in this array, then we have a problem.

Imagine that one of the entity-instances set the attribute A to 15 and the other entity-instance sets A to 46.
The chronological order is everything here. Should A be set to 15 or to 46?

To deal with this problem, a decision was made to treat the entity array as "lower array-index => older".
This means that if in index 0 and 1 of the array, an entity E1 is created, then index 0 is treated as the creation and index 1 is provoking an error.

With updates, a similar thing happens. First the update of index 0 is treated, then the update of indes 1 may overwrite the previous update.

For the temporal evolution of entities, each and every instance of an entity in the entity array are pushed to the TRoE database, "in order".

As modifiedAt and created at are built-in properties and set by the broker, all instances will have the same timestamps.
This is why the use of "observedAt" is so important - only way to *really* know the timing of these requests.

### Notifications
Creation and updates of entities provoke notifications to be sent for all matching subnscriptions.

### Cross Notifications (NGSI-LD to NGSIv2)
### Subscriptions: Creation, Modification, and Deletion
- TimeInterval not supported
- Subscription Query Language - still using the old one from NGSIv2
### Notification Parameters
### HTTP Headers for notifications
### Registrations: Creation, Modification, and Deletion
### Subscriptions on Registrations
### Entity Type Discovery
### Attribute Discovery
### Simplified Representation of Entities
### Pagination and Counting Results
### Tenants
### Scopes (NGSIv2 Service Path)
### Multiple Entity Types
### Geo-Location
### Geoquery Language
### GeoJSON
### Language Maps
### DatasetID

### Forwarding
  Forwarding in NGSI-LD is still under discussion in the ETSI ISG CIM group where we define the NGSI-LD API.
  Forwarding *will be* included in the next release of the NGSI-LD API specification (v1.6.1, planned for summer 2022).

  Before this is included in the specification, it can't really be implemented, so ... hopefully ready at the end of 2022.

  That said, we did implement a PoC for forwarding, for a limited set of requests:
  * GET /entities/{entityId}
  * PATCH /entities/{entityId}/attrs/{attrName}

  So, those two requests actually support forwarding, just, not exactly as it will be defined in the NGSI-LD API specification.

  The NGSI-LD API specification will introduce a number of new fields for Context Source Registration, enhancing the registrations
  to support forwarding.
  Especially important is a field (currently) called "peerType", accepting three values:
  * exclusive
  * inclusive
  * auxiliary

  An exclusive registration means that the registree assumes full ownership of what it registers.
  For example, if an entity with ID "E1" is registered with attributes "temperature" and "pressure", then those two attributes of E1
  are exclusive to the registree.   If another registree try to register the same attributes (any of the two) for E1, then this second registration 
  is discarded by the broker.
  This peer type (or registration mode) is typically used for registering IoT Agents in a broker.

  An inclusive registration is meant for federation, won't go into any details here.
  I *did* go into details about *exclusive* registrations because, the PoC implements *exclusive* registrations only.
  There's no field for it, Orion-LD just assumes that all registrations are exclusive.
  Remember, Orion-LD doesn't implement federation just yet.

  Now, with this PoC, you can register a different attribute for a number of IoT agents (or brokers, or whatever), on the same entity and
  when retrieving that entity from the broker where the registrations were made, the broker will send forwarded requests to all the
  IoT agents (or whatever) and then merge all the attributes into the entity and respond with that.
  Part of the entity can also reside in the broker itself. But, as the registrations are exclusive, no attribute can be local+registered, not
  registered twice. Is an attempt to do so is made, an error will occur.

#### HTTP Headers for forwarded requests
Some HTTP headers are inherited from the initiating request:
* X-Auth-Token
* Authorize
* NGSILD-Tenant - not yet implemented

### Federation
For federation to "be a thing" in NGSI-LD, it needs to be specified in the NGSI-LD API specification, which is work in progress as of December 2021
That said, NEC's Scorpio NGSI-LD context broker implements a proprietary federation, supporting "inclusive" registrations and only on GET requests, plus,
distribution of subscriptions, for correct notifications.

Orion-LD has its Proof Of Concept for "federating" with exclusive IoT-Agents - also a preprietary implementation.

Both Orion-LD's and Scorpio's approach to federation will be modified as soon as Forwarding is fully defined (and published) in the NGSI-LD API specification


### TRoE - Temporal Representation of Entities
### TRoE Queries and Retrieval
### Modification of TRoE
### Context Servicing
### Notifications in MQTT
